Hello and welcome to the unit testing for Unity Workshops.
And here we're going to be looking at scene loading.
Now traditionally when we think of unit testing we think of testing the smallest unit of code with the
fewest lines and the fewest dependencies.
So on the opposite end of that spectrum of simplicity, we have complexity.
And one of the important foundational objects inside unity is the scene itself.
Everything that you see as a player in a game experience is inside of a scene.
So we can unit test the individual scripts or elements within a scene.
Or as we're going to show here, we could test the entire scene itself.
Now why might we do that?
First of all, it's a nice smoke test.
A simple way to just see did the scene load and did it load with no exceptions.
That alone is worth it.
Let's think about the things that we can do.
We could make assumptions on the scene structure and what objects are inside of it.
We could make assumptions on the behaviors in things in that scene.
And a workflow that I find really cool is you can leave these tests behind and have the non-programmers
on your team run the tests before and after doing their work.
Perhaps a level designer being able to work more confidently, knowing that new levels added, do not
break any existing scenes or revisions to existing levels.
Don't break any of the scenes either, and your art team can be sure that if they were to replace some
assets or add some new assets, that from the programmer's standpoint, nothing has been broken.
So what would that workflow look like?
Well, I'll show an example here of being able to create a play mode test and load an entire scene into
that play mode test and make some assumptions on it using assertions.
For example, you could load a scene and in the intro scene check that the menu properly is being displayed.
We're in a gameplay scene.
Be sure that the background element, the hero and all the enemies have been instantiated at the proper
moment.
Now, because we're opening the door to the great complexity possible within a given scene, it may
seem overwhelming that you'd want to test out everything in a scene, but again, I think even a very
conservative test that just loads the scene and makes sure 1 or 2 key elements are there, with no exceptions.
Thrown is a fantastic low hanging fruit that will bring value to your team.
Let's take a look inside.
Unity.
Here we are inside the core sample project.
Now in the test runner window.
Here we've got lots of different categories.
I've got the scene loading selected and you can see that we've got some editor and runtime tests.
Because scenes and the things that I'm choosing to test here are related to the typical runtime behavior
of unity Monobehaviours.
For example, I'm going to focus on just the runtime test, the play mode test.
So I'll disable the edit mode test.
Let's take a look at what we've got here.
So what we're going to do is every time we run this particular test, we're going to be checking that
the intro scene has a hero inside of it that simulates our main game character, that the intro scene
loads without any exceptions thrown.
And then we'll repeat that for the game scene.
You could imagine that you'd have one test that could test all of your scenes in a systematic way.
What I've chosen to do here is structure one test for each of the functionalities that we'd want, one
for the hero, one for the exceptions, and doing that for each of the scenes, all within one test
structure.
But you could decide how to scale it up depending what you and your team want to do.
Let me run these tests.
Everything passes there.
You can see we've got some console traffic.
Let's take a look at the source code.
So in this test I'm saying that the scene one intro, which is the name of one of the scenes in the
project, we'll assume that the hero is not null when the scene is loaded, unlike some of our smallest
unit testing, loading the scene and doing it well and nice.
Having a nice workflow here.
It does involve some setup, so let's talk about what the setup is.
First thing is that I'll listen to the scene manager to see.
Hey has the scene that I want to load been loaded, then I will load the scene here.
I've made a static variable for the scene names, just so it's easier for me to be able to isolate and
update those if I need to.
Then I will sit here and wait while the scene is loaded.
This makes sure I don't assume or assert anything about that until after the scene is loaded.
It happens quite quickly.
Then here I will be able to do any of the introspection into the scene.
A very powerful thing I can do is look through the entire scene after it's loaded, and look for any
existence of a given script.
If I had a prefab called hero or an individual hero script in that scene, this would return one value.
I could also get a list back of all of the heroes or all of the enemies.
If I have multiple, then I can iterate over them and.
And perform whatever test I want.
I'm doing a purposely lean test here.
All I do is make sure that the hero is not null.
If, for example, an artist or a level designer accidentally deleted the hero in a given scene, this
would fail.
And it was a nice test just to make sure that the elements are there.
You can imagine a system inside unity could be quite complex and your scenes could be quite complex
too.
You may have hundreds or even thousands of objects.
You may not necessarily want to do an assertion for every single one of them, but depending how you
organize your scene, you may be able to check for some simple things like the background, the UI,
the hero, and a list of enemies that alone easy test to perform by just adding some lines here, and
then you have more confidence that as you and your team work on the code and make commits to your version
control repository that no one is accidentally breaking something.
Remember, what you're currently doing now is needing to then play the scene or all the scenes and make
sure that you don't visually detect that something is missing or broken here.
Being automated is much, much smoother.
Let's take a look at the other tests.
We've got one here that loads the scene, and then just make sure it does not throw any exceptions.
Then we repeat the same two tests for the all other scene.
Now let's take a look at the top of that testing scene and see some of the additional setups that's
needed.
One thing is that because we're loading scenes with code, those need to exist in the unity build settings.
That's true in production as well as in testing.
Now you and your team could simply make sure that it's always updated and do that manually within the
unity editor.
And let's take a look at how we would do that now here inside unity.
You go to File Build Settings.
And up here is the list of all the scenes that you need.
Now if you forget to add one in there, the test would fail.
So rather than require us to remember this particular step, which is okay if your team wants to do
that, I'm automating that and dynamically adding the scenes that we want to add.
So the way that I do that, I use some existing interfaces that unity makes available here for when
the build is being set up and when the build is being cleaned up.
These are different than some of the attributes we've seen in earlier tests, but then I won't get into
the complexity here.
But just know that in the setup, what I'm doing is adding our two test scenes to the build settings.
And down here in the cleanup, I'm reverting or removing those two that have been added.
Now there's lots of different ways you could organize that, but you can take a look at the source code
and see if there's something else you want to do there.
Down here in the test, I'm assuming that I'm able to call load scene on any of the testable scenes
and we're good to go.
So that's it.
It's pretty easy to set up, and if you build off of what is given here in the sample project, you'll
find quick success in being able to test your scenes for your game production.
Thanks.